INTRODUCTION TO DOCKER

Docker is a container program that allows you to build. test and deploy application and even enables developer to package applications into container.

ADVANTAGES OF USING DOCKER

Fast, consistent delivery of your applications
Responsive deployment and scaling
Running more workloads on the same hardware

DOCKER RUNTIME

It basically allows us to start and stop the container

There are various types of Docker runtimes available but for now we will discuss here about runc and containerd

runc - It is used by or you can say operated by containerd and is basically used to start and stop the container.
containerd - It manages complete container life cycle. It even do image transfer/storage and container execution, supervision and stuffs.

DOCKER ARCHITECTURE

Docker uses a client-server architecture.
The Docker client talks to the Docker daemon, which manages docker objects such as images, networks, container and volumes.

DOCKER ENGINE

Client server technology that builds and run the container using Docker's container
It comprises of Docker Daemon, Rest API, and CLI (client)
CLI Talks to Docker daemon through API.

DOCKER DAEMON

It manages docker objects such as images, networks, container and volumes

DOCKER ORCHESTRATION

It is as set of technologies for managing docker at larger scales

DOCKER IMAGE

Docker image is a file comprised of multiple layers, used to execute code in Docker container

DOCKER FILE

It is a text file that contains all the commands a user could run to create a image
It contains all the instructions needed by docker to build an image

Basically you can say is

A docker file is a recipe for creating docker images
A docker images get build by making a docker commands.
A docker container is a running instance of docker images.

OPEN CONTAINER INITIATIVE (OCI)

It is an Linux foundation project to design open standards for containers

OCI currently contains two specifications

RUNTIME SPECIFICATIONS - It defines how to run OCI Image bundle as container
IMAGE SPECIFICATION - It defines how to create OCI Image.

HOW CLI WORKS

Suppose you write docker run hello-world. It will first check that it is present in your local system or not.
If it is not present in your local system then It will go to docker registry.
It will pull and download the image from the registry, will run the image into container and says the command that is assigned to that image.



BASIC DOCKER COMMANDS

docker version - Clients and servers version of Docker
docker images - Lists all docker images
docker run (Image name/ID) - Runs a command in new container
docker ps - Lists all running container
docker start (container Name/ID) - starts the container
docker kill (container Name/ID) - stops a running container
docker rm (container Name/ID) - deletes a stopped container
docker ps -a   - show all containers
docker ps -l    - show latest created container
docker pull - pulls image from register
docker exec - runs a command in runtime container
docker prune - removes all unused container, images etc.
docker ls - lists all container
